Muhammad Rizky Altasya
Exploratory Data Analysis of E-Commerce Transaction
E-commerce plays an important role to provide the easiest way for customers. I have always been interested in dealing with complex E-Commerce cases, developing powerful new dashboards to support every stakeholder in business decision-making, and even providing recommendations for business strategy & planning. That's why I want to take a crucial part in data analyst or business intelligence in a fintech company to make every aspect of E-Commerce business transactions being seamless. Considering the case, let me present to provide new insight from a business, product and marketing perspective. Before going into the analysis part, let’s take a look at the given dataset where the initial dataset includes 12 columns and 51290 raw data in rows. So, I decided to move forward into the data preparation from Ms. Excel. Since the data in Microsoft Excel is lacking in redundant and duplicate tables, I started checking each column in the data set to make the right one so that I can easily analyze & process further steps using SQL in a good way. I started manipulating the data from the USD amount converted to Rupiah because the price info in would work fine in Rupiah so that each row in the USD amount column was multiplied by the value of 1 USD in Rupiah. After getting the real value in Rupiah, I classify the data from each payment method to generate a net profit referring to the percentage of payment or the price of the custom package on the website. Here is the data I chose to further analyze in SQL to get the expected result & desired output later:
 
Continuing to the next section, I imported the dataset from .csv format to the MySQL workbench and matched each type of dataset column with the actual conditions and this is the data ready for further processing & analysis. Let's divide the desired output into 3 measurement metrics from the business, product and marketing side.
Business Side
Hence, when I saw the scope of data to be analyzed in each tool I familiar with. In this case project, I need to design each metrics for various entity of the business which started with business perspective, I decided to move forward with special case such:
•	How is the monthly and weekly business growth from this E-Commerce?
•	How about the buyer power for each customer based on the customer traffic monthly?
•	What is the total quantity trend for each customer type by monthly & weekly?
•	What is the average basket size of regular sales and profit in yearly transaction?
•	Key takeaways the insight from the aspects of business side? 
I used MySQL to do all analysis stage and create multiple tables to find every output I want to deliver. To make it short and easy to understand. It is short answer of the expected table to display in a glance which equipping by the chart below for each question from the business side as follows:
•	Monthly and weekly business growth from this E-Commerce
 
•	The buyer power for each customer based on the customer traffic monthly
 
•	Total quantity trend for each customer type mothly
 
•	The average basket size of regular sales and profit in yearly transaction
 
•	Business Side Dashboard
 
For the last business queries, I attached the dashboard that you can access: 
Business Side E-Commerce Transaction | Tableau Public
Key Takeaways
From all the analysis above, to capture business growth, as seen from the total revenue and net profit generated by the company, it has a good track record, although it is still not significant enough and has experienced a decline in both revenue & profit in certain periods. On the other hand, the transaction volume of customers who have the buyer power to make transactions is quite good because it is estimated that most customers are in the range of 45-50% which represents our business is doing well in targeted potential customers. If we break down more deeply, most of our customers are registered members, but the ability to penetrate the market is still worse recorded by new customer estimates. So, the commercial team has to make a new strategy by doing flagship program for planning outbound sales to make new engagement with potential merchants who seize the opportunity to bring in new customers in doing new transaction. So, looking at the basket size, we can conclude that revenue generated more than 1 million for every customer is considered quite effective because we don’t know the variable costs and fixed costs incurred with an estimated profit per customer reaching more than twelve thousand rupiahs for our business. The overall business overview for the company is growth and scale enough but still limited in acquiring new potential customers which shows the commercial team is still striving hard in approaching prospected merchant in certain conditions and the commercial team must find out effective ways to increase the expected potential merchants to bring new customers in increasing volume transactions for our business process.
Product Side
Move to product side where I want to provide which product should develop or doing bid optimization to create A/B testing for each category of product feature in using mobile/web to improve the customer experience or which payment method that is used frequently by user for doing transaction. Here is the product question should cover product metrics that I designate:
•	How the comparison of each product category growth by the user?
•	How to find the top 3 special product in each product category?
•	How to identify product level sales analysis include total sales and average sales per order?
•	What is the top 3 frequently payment method for each section of product category?
•	Key takeaways from the aspect of product side?
Like usual MySQL used to provide all the metrics that I designate to showcase the insight for the product department. Here’s the answer from every question above:
•	Comparison of each product category growth by the user
 
•	Find the top 3 special product in each product category
 
 
 
 
•	Identify product level sales analysis include total sales and average sales per order
 
•	Top 3 frequently payment method for each section of product category
 
•	Product Side Dashboard
 
For the last product side queries, I attached the dashboard that you can access:
Product Side E-Commerce Transaction | Tableau Public
Key Takeaways
From all the analysis above from the product side, we gain new insights that customer growth for each product category has the similar pattern, increasing significantly in May and then there is no significant growth until the turning point is increasing in November, which means the product can be handle all the product categories on the website coincide with each other. In addition, each product category has the top 3 products that are customers favorites to buy so that the product & business team can work together to develop a business and product strategy to acquire merchants who focus on selling these products. We also found the fashion category to be the largest transaction volume with effective revenue per user reaching 1.5 million so that the product team can collaborate with the IT team in bid optimizing to design a roadmap for fashion features to be more developed on our business platform to maximize business opportunities in the fashion category. Lastly, apart from our analysis on each product, we also must streamline the transaction and avoiding the friction such creating snap checkout to improve secure transaction process by focusing more on DANA, QRIS, and OVO because customers like it the most. 
Marketing Side
Lastly, marketing has a crucial role in customer growth and supporting profitability of the companies. Without any hesitation campaign marketing has becoming the interactive channel to gain new user join our business. One of the most tracking tools to assess how effective our campaign is by designing marketing metrics which more focus on conversion rate. Each channel has uniqueness and differentiation in delivering communication in our campaign to prospect customer later. Here’s the marketing metrics I used in order to assess which strategy we have to adjust for our market segmentation:
•	How to compare percentage rate customer id for each device monthly & daily?
•	What is the top 3 typical merchant prospective based on merchant traffic?
•	When is the perfect time to attract new customers in creating loyalty program?
•	How is conversion rate of customer login type from website?
•	Key takeaways from the aspect of marketing side?
After all the metrics compiling, we will perceive the short answer in a glance from marketing metrics:
•	Comparison percentage rate customer id for each device monthly & daily
 
•	Top 3 typical merchant prospective based on merchant traffic
 
•	The perfect day to attract new customers in creating loyalty program
 
 
•	Conversion rate of customer login type from website

 
•	Marketing side dashboard
 
For the last marketing side queries, I attached the dashboard that you can access:
Marketing Side E-Commerce Transaction | Tableau Public
Key takeaways
After above marketing analysis, we found website is more robust for customer interaction with products and making transactions which reach 90%+ so marketing can take decision to direct all customer focus to website like from paid ad search, organic search and customer typing right away. Making website strengthens to optimize marketing is the best way to increase website traffic & website performance. In managing promos effectively, you can focus more on the top 3 merchants and adjust them to product categories to develop dashboard analytics to provide significant income to potential merchants. Based on historical data to launch a new campaign it will be more effective to acquire new customers on Tuesday & using website direction from omnichannel campaign due to large volume of transactions in a certain time while carrying out daily activities will generate more customer traffic which can improve our website performance.
Outlook
This case study was done not only to showcase my ability in doing advance analysis using Ms. Excel, SQL, and Tableau but also to highlight my enthusiast and curiosity seeking for Business Intelligence and Data Analyst Intern.
